Docs/pluggable components (#2875)
dapr/docs: daprdocs/content/en/concepts/components-concept.md

description: "Modular functionality used by building blocks and applications"
---

Dapr uses a modular design where functionality is delivered as a component. Each component has an interface definition. All of the components are interchangable so that you can swap out one component with the same interface for another.

> The [components contrib repository](https://github.com/dapr/components-contrib) is where you can contribute implementations for the component interfaces and extend Dapr's capabilities. Alternatively, Dapr component interfaces can also be extended with [pluggable components](https://docs.dapr.io/concepts/components-concept/#pluggable-components).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can contribute implementations and extend Dapr's component interfaces capabilities via:

- The [components-contrib repository](https://github.com/dapr/components-contrib) 
- [Pluggable components]({{< ref "components-concept.md#pluggable-components >}}).
```

> A building block can use any combination of components. For example the [actors]({{<ref "actors-overview.md">}}) building block and the [state management]({{<ref "state-management-overview.md">}}) building block both use [state components](https://github.com/dapr/components-contrib/tree/master/state). As another example, the [pub/sub]({{<ref "pubsub-overview.md">}}) building block uses [pub/sub components](https://github.com/dapr/components-contrib/tree/master/pubsub).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A building block can use any combination of components. For example, the [actors]({{<ref "actors-overview.md">}}) and the [state management]({{<ref "state-management-overview.md">}}) building blocks both use [state components](https://github.com/dapr/components-contrib/tree/master/state). 

As another example, the [pub/sub]({{<ref "pubsub-overview.md">}}) building block uses [pub/sub components](https://github.com/dapr/components-contrib/tree/master/pubsub).
```

You can get a list of current components available in the hosting environment using the `dapr components` CLI command.

## Component specification

> Each component has a specification (or spec) that it conforms to. Components are configured at design-time with a YAML file which is stored in either a `components/local` folder within your solution, or globally in the `.dapr` folder created when invoking `dapr init`. These YAML files adhere to the generic [Dapr component schema]({{<ref "component-schema.md">}}), but each is specific to the component specification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each component has a specification (or spec) that it conforms to. Components are configured at design-time with a YAML file which is stored in either:

- A `components/local` folder within your solution, or 
- Globally in the `.dapr` folder created when invoking `dapr init`. 

These YAML files adhere to the generic [Dapr component schema]({{<ref "component-schema.md">}}), but each is specific to the component specification.
```

- A `components/local` folder within your solution, or
- Globally in the `.dapr` folder created when invoking `dapr init`.

These YAML files adhere to the generic [Dapr component schema]({{<ref "component-schema.md">}}), but each is specific to the component specification.

It is important to understand that the component spec values, particularly the spec `metadata`, can change between components of the same component type, for example between different state stores, and that some design-time spec values can be overridden at runtime when making requests to a component's API. As a result, it is strongly recommended to review a [component's specs]({{<ref "components-reference">}}), paying particular attention to the sample payloads for requests to set the metadata used to interact with the component.

The diagram below shows some examples of the components for each component type
<img src="/images/concepts-components.png" width=1200>

## Built-in and pluggable components

Dapr has built-in components that are included as part of the runtime. These are public components that are developed and donated by the community and are available to use in every release. 

> Dapr also allows for users to create their own private components called pluggable components. These are components that are self-hosted (exe or container), do not need to be written in Go, exist outside the Dapr runtime, and are able to "plug" into Dapr to utilize the building block APIs.

Author: @msfussell @hhunter-ms, can we change from `exe` to `process`?

I mean, .exe is just a windows file extension for executable

```suggestion
Dapr also allows for users to create their own private components called pluggable components. These are components that are self-hosted (process or container), do not need to be written in Go, exist outside the Dapr runtime, and are able to "plug" into Dapr to utilize the building block APIs.
```

Author: already fixed

### Middleware

> Dapr allows custom [middleware]({{<ref "middleware.md">}}) to be plugged into the HTTP request processing pipeline. Middleware can perform additional actions on an HTTP request, such as authentication, encryption and message transformation before the request is routed to the user code, or before the response is returned to the client. The middleware components are used with the [service invocation]({{<ref "service-invocation-overview.md">}}) building block.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dapr allows custom [middleware]({{<ref "middleware.md">}}) to be plugged into the HTTP request processing pipeline. Middleware can perform additional actions on an HTTP request (such as authentication, encryption, and message transformation) before the request is routed to the user code, or the response is returned to the client. The middleware components are used with the [service invocation]({{<ref "service-invocation-overview.md">}}) building block.
```

- [List of supported middleware components]({{< ref supported-middleware >}})
- [Middleware implementations](https://github.com/dapr/components-contrib/tree/master/middleware)

> ## Pluggable Components

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Pluggable components
```

> Dapr allows for users to create their own self-hosted components, they are called pluggable components. These components are just ordinary components that do not need to be written in Go, exist outside the Dapr runtime and are still able to "plug" into Dapr to utilize existing building block APIs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dapr allows you to create your own self-hosted components, called [pluggable components]({{<ref "pluggable-components/_index.md">}}). Pluggable components are just ordinary components that:

- Do not need to be written in Go
- Exist outside the Dapr runtime 
- Are still able to "plug" into Dapr to utilize existing building block APIs
```

> Dapr allows for users to create their own self-hosted components, they are called pluggable components. These components are just ordinary components that do not need to be written in Go, exist outside the Dapr runtime and are still able to "plug" into Dapr to utilize existing building block APIs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Dapr allows for users to create their own self-hosted components called pluggable components. These are  components that do not need to be written in Go, exist outside the Dapr runtime and are able to "plug" into Dapr to utilize existing building block APIs.
```

> Creating your own pluggable component can be helpful for scenarios where the Dapr project doesn't provide a component integration you need. Pluggable components are also useful for scenarios where writing a traditional Dapr component might not be feasible (e.g., unfamiliar with Go, remaining untethered to Dapr release cycle, not interested in contributing custom component to Dapr project etc.). For these situations creating a pluggable component could be a better option.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Creating your own pluggable component can be helpful for scenarios where:

- The Dapr project doesn't provide a component integration you need
- Writing a traditional Dapr component might not be feasible (e.g., unfamiliar with Go, remaining untethered to Dapr release cycle, not interested in contributing custom component to Dapr project etc.). 

For these situations, creating a pluggable component could be a better option.
```

> Creating your own pluggable component can be helpful for scenarios where the Dapr project doesn't provide a component integration you need. Pluggable components are also useful for scenarios where writing a traditional Dapr component might not be feasible (e.g., unfamiliar with Go, remaining untethered to Dapr release cycle, not interested in contributing custom component to Dapr project etc.). For these situations creating a pluggable component could be a better option.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Where possible we encourage donating components to the Dapr project and community. 

However, pluggable components are used in scenarios where you want to create your own private component and choose not to include this into the Dapr project.  This may be because you cannot include your component into the Dapr component repo since it is specific to your company or due to IP concerns. Or you want decouple your component updates from the Dapr release cycle.
```

> The following pages provide more context on this subject:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Learn more about pluggable components and the scenarios that call for them.]({{<ref "pluggable-components-overview">}})
```

> The following pages provide more context on this subject:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For more information read [Pluggable components overview]({{<ref "pluggable-components-overview">}})
```

> - [Pluggable components overview]({{<ref "pluggable-components-overview">}})

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> - [Pluggable components overview]({{<ref "pluggable-components-overview">}})

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> **Note:** Since pluggable components are not required to be written in Go, they follow a different implementation process than built-in Dapr components. For more information on that process read the documentation for [Developing new components](https://github.com/dapr/components-contrib/blob/master/docs/developing-component.md)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{% alert title="Note" color="primary" %}}
Since pluggable components are not required to be written in Go, they follow a different implementation process than built-in Dapr components. For more information on that process, read the documentation for [developing new built-in components](https://github.com/dapr/components-contrib/blob/master/docs/developing-component.md).
{{% /alert %}}
```

> **Note:** Since pluggable components are not required to be written in Go, they follow a different implementation process than built-in Dapr components. For more information on that process read the documentation for [Developing new components](https://github.com/dapr/components-contrib/blob/master/docs/developing-component.md)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

{{% alert title="Note" color="primary" %}} Since pluggable components are not required to be written in Go, they follow a different implementation process than built-in Dapr components. For more information on developing built-in components read [developing new components](https://github.com/dapr/components-contrib/blob/master/docs/developing-component.md)
{{% /alert %}}

```

### Middleware

Dapr allows custom [middleware]({{<ref "middleware.md">}}) to be plugged into the HTTP request processing pipeline. Middleware can perform additional actions on an HTTP request (such as authentication, encryption, and message transformation) before the request is routed to the user code, or the response is returned to the client. The middleware components are used with the [service invocation]({{<ref "service-invocation-overview.md">}}) building block.

- [List of supported middleware components]({{< ref supported-middleware >}})
- [Middleware implementations](https://github.com/dapr/components-contrib/tree/master/middleware)

## Pluggable components

> Dapr allows for users to create their own self-hosted components called pluggable components. These are components that do not need to be written in Go, exist outside the Dapr runtime and are able to "plug" into Dapr to utilize existing building block APIs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dapr allows for users to create their own self-hosted components called pluggable components. These are components that do not need to be written in Go, exist outside the Dapr runtime, and are able to "plug" into Dapr to utilize existing building block APIs.
```

> Where possible we encourage donating components to the Dapr project and community.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Where possible, donating components to the Dapr project and community is encouraged.
```

> However, pluggable components are used in scenarios where you want to create your own private component and choose not to include this into the Dapr project. This may be because you cannot include your component into the Dapr component repo since it is specific to your company or due to IP concerns. Or you want decouple your component updates from the Dapr release cycle.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, pluggable components are ideal for scenarios where you want to create your own private component that will not be included into the Dapr project. For example:
- Your component may be specific to your company or pose IP concerns, so it cannot be included in the Dapr component repo. 
- You want decouple your component updates from the Dapr release cycle.
```

For more information read [Pluggable components overview]({{<ref "pluggable-components-overview">}})

> {{% alert title="Note" color="primary" %}} Since pluggable components are not required to be written in Go, they follow a different implementation process than built-in Dapr components. For more information on developing built-in components read [developing new components](https://github.com/dapr/components-contrib/blob/master/docs/developing-component.md)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{% alert title="Note" color="primary" %}} 
Since pluggable components are not required to be written in Go, they follow a different implementation process than built-in Dapr components. For more information on developing built-in components, read [developing new components](https://github.com/dapr/components-contrib/blob/master/docs/developing-component.md).
```
